---
title:  "mHM release v5.13"
excerpt: We, the mHM developers, are proud to release mHM v5.13 ...
header:
  teaser: /assets/posts/2023-06-02/teaser.png

author: "Sebastian Müller"
---

We, the mHM developers, are proud to release mHM v5.13!

The release can be accessed here:

[mHM v5.13](https://git.ufz.de/mhm/mhm/-/releases/v5.13.0){: .btn .btn--primary }


# Highlights

We have added some neat new features. The most notable ones are listed below.


## Python bindings and distribution

mHM was bitten by Python. This means, you can install mhm as a Python package now and it will bring you both:
vanilla mHM as a command `mhm` as well as the Python bindings to control the model from within Python.

There are pre-built wheels for Linux and MacOS (no ARM64 at the moment) that you can install with
```
$ pip install mhm
```

The conda package was updated as well to ship the bindings. Just do a
```
$ conda install mhm
```

as described in our [installation instructions](https://mhm-ufz.org/guides).

Then you can do things like these:
```python
import mhm
import matplotlib.pyplot as plt
# download test domain 1
mhm.download_test(path="example_domain")
# run the downloaded example
mhm.model.init(cwd="example_domain")
mhm.model.run()
runoff_sim_obs = mhm.get_runoff_eval(gauge_id=1)
mhm.model.finalize()
# plotting
plt.plot(runoff_sim_obs[:, 0])
plt.plot(runoff_sim_obs[:, 1], linestyle="--")
plt.show()
```

{% include figure image_path="/assets/posts/2023-06-02/plot.png" alt="Simple mHM discharge plot." caption="Simple mHM discharge plot." %}

Also, another little helper command ships with the bindings: `mhm-download`.
To download the test-domains and to check if your installation is working, you can do:
```
$ mhm-download --verbose --domain 1 --path example_domain
$ mhm example_domain/
```

More information can be found in the [documentation](https://mhm.pages.ufz.de/mhm/stable/md_pybind__r_e_a_d_m_e.html).


## Improved NetCDF output

You now have more control over the output time-stamps in the written NetCDF files.
Before, the time-stamp was always one hour before the end of the respective time-span which could be confusing for different step sizes.

Depending on the output time-step, you can set the reference point via the `output_time_reference` namelist entry in the output namelists with these flag values:

- `0`: (default) start of the time interval (i.e. `1990-01-01 00:00` for daily output on `1990-01-01`)
- `1`: center of the time interval (i.e. `1990-01-01 12:00` for daily output on `1990-01-01`)
- `2`: end of the time interval (i.e. `1990-01-02 00:00` for daily output on `1990-01-01`)

Also, all axes in the NetCDF files will now have **bounds** for each point.
Especially in case of the time-axis, the represented time-span is now explicitly given:

{% include figure image_path="/assets/posts/2023-06-02/ncview.png" alt="Output comparison." caption="Ncview will now show information on the valid time-span." %}


## Silent mode and better exit codes

Many users run mHM on HPCs with different workflow managers. To improve the user experience here, we added two features:

1. when a mHM run fails, it will now always return an exit code `1`, so your workflow manager will notice it failed
2. to keep your log file clean (e.g. when doing optimizations), we added a silent mode:
   ```
   $ mhm --quiet # or -q
   ```
   This will prevent terminal messages during the run, but still displays error messages. To even disable error messages, you can repeat this flag:
   ```
   $ mhm -qq
   ```


# Release notes

The full release notes can be found here:

[mHM v5.13 release notes](https://mhm-ufz.org/about/releases/#mhm-v5130-may-2023){: .btn .btn--primary }
